### 0. Introduction

In recent years, numerical simulation of chemical reaction systems has reached a level of sophistication, which makes it interesting even for chemical engineering. Mathematically speaking, simulation involves the numerical solution of systems of ordinary differential equations — possibly large, usually nonlinear and “stiff”. In principle, these systems can be efficiently treated by chemical kinetics packages such as LARKIN, which is especially designed for large systems (compare DEUFLHARD/NOWAK [9] for a recent survey).

However, as soon as polyreactions arise and each individual polymer must be computed up to technical accuracy, then both storage requirements and computing times tend to increase beyond a tolerable level. In special situations, the actual computation of statistical moments is a sufficient alternative — see e.g. recent work by FRENKLACH [12, 13]. If the total polymer distribution function is needed, then the moment treatment will appear to be unsatisfactory. As a further alternative, continuous polyreaction models are often recommended with the polymer degree as a continuous non-negative variable — see e.g. RAY [18]. This kind of modeling leads to partial differential equations, which might be attacked by a Galerkin method based on Laguerre polynomials — see GAJEWSKI/ZACHARIAS [14] for a description and approximation study. However, making the discrete polymer degree a continuous variable is somewhat artificial — a feature, which shows up in poor approximations for small polymer degree. Details are presented in Section 1 below.

In order to avoid this artificial modeling, the present paper proposes a different approximation scheme, which preserves the discrete structure of the polymer degree. This method is a Galerkin method based on orthogonal polynomials of a discrete variable, the polymer degree. Such polynomials are generated by a discrete inner product in terms of a weight function, which may be interpreted as a probability distribution function. The basic approach and its connection with the statistical moments are given in Section 2. For the Schulz-Flory distribution, one obtains the so-called discrete Laguerre functions, whereas the Poisson distribution leads to the Charlier polynomials — see Section 3. In Section 4, the Galerkin scheme is applied to a selection of typical polyreaction mechanisms. Finally, in Section 5, numerical experiments are given that nicely illustrate the attractive features of the approach advocated herein.