Euler (or other discretization schemes) in the chosen Hilbert space. This idea has been introduced by BORNEMANN in [7] and [8] for parabolic partial differential equations. He proves asymptotic expansions for a class of schemes of interest and his results will be applied later in this chapter. If we were able to solve (1.25) exactly, the extrapolation could use order and step-size control as it is well known for ODE's [16]. Fortunately it is shown in [7], that the equation (1.25) has to be solved only up to a tolerance  $ \epsilon_{CAE} $ for guaranteeing the nice performance of an extrapolation code. Whereas in [7] the equation (1.25) is an elliptic PDE (solved by use of finite elements), in the present context the solution is approximated by use of orthogonal polynomials of a discrete variable. A two parameter family of weight functions  $ \Psi_{\rho,\alpha} $ will be introduced allowing the approximation of a wide class of standard distributions (see Chapter 2). The weight functions  $ \Psi_{\rho,\alpha} $ lead in a natural way to a scale of Hilbert spaces  $ H_{\rho,\alpha} $ and an orthogonal basis of these spaces. In order to solve the CAE (1.25), we employ (as far as possible) analytical properties of the orthogonal polynomials associated to the basis of  $ H_{\rho,\alpha} $ called modified discrete Laguerre polynomials. The numerical evaluation of the scalar products (1.24) can be done by a summation algorithm called SUMMATOR. The error control of the SUMMATOR will be obtained adaptively from the requirements of the CAE – solver, in particular the error introduced by the projection into an n-dimensional subspace of  $ H_{\rho,\alpha} $ has to dominate the error introduced by the perturbation of this projection. The extrapolation, in turn, prescribes the tolerance  $ \epsilon_{CAE} $ of the Galerkin method. Thus we get a chain of adaptive requirements:

 $$ \epsilon_{I N T}\mathrm{~(t i m e-s t e p~c o n t r o l)~}\to\epsilon_{C A E}\mathrm{~(G a l e r k i n~m e t h o d)~}\to\epsilon_{S U M}\mathrm{~(S U M M A T O R)} $$ 

### 1.2 A Two-Parameter Scale of Hilbert Spaces

Motivated by the considerations in Section 1.1 we look for solutions of a CODE in a scale of weighted sequence spaces related to $H_\rho$ from (1.17). These spaces should be spanned by orthogonal functions, which are explicitly known. Furthermore we require good approximation properties for a wide range of problems to be treated. This will be done by adding a parameter $\alpha$.

DEFINITION 1.1. Define the weighted sequence spaces  $ H_{\rho,\alpha} $ by

 $$ H_{\rho,\alpha}:=\left\{u\in\mathbb{R}^{\mathbb{N}}\mid\|u\|_{\rho,\alpha}^{2}:=\sum_{s=1}^{\infty}u_{s}^{2}\Psi_{\rho,\alpha}(s)^{-1}<\infty\right\}, $$ 