homogeneous difference equation. As the basis functions  $ \psi_{k} $ can be generated by the three-term recurrence formula (2.22) started with

 $$ \psi_{-1}=0\quad,\quad\psi_{0}(s)=\Psi_{\rho,\alpha}(s)\quad, $$ 

for given $s$ and $\Psi_{\rho,\alpha}(s)$ the algorithm can easily be implemented. The computation of $\Psi_{\rho,\alpha}(s)$, however, requires $s$ multiplications. For $\alpha \ll s$ computing time can be saved by recalling that (see e.g. [20], p. 190)

 $$ \lim_{s\to\infty}\frac{\Gamma(s+\alpha)}{s^{\alpha}\Gamma(s)}=1,\alpha>-1. $$ 

This means that for  $ \alpha \ll s $ we can substitute

 $$ \begin{pmatrix}s-1+\alpha\\ s-1\end{pmatrix}\rightarrow\frac{s^{\alpha}}{\Gamma(1+\alpha)}. $$ 

An error estimation can be found in [52] (replacing  $ \alpha \rightarrow -\alpha $ there). This strategy has been used in Example 5.3 above, where s can range up to  $ 10^6 $.

### 4.3 THE PROGRAM CODEX

The implementation of the algorithm developed in this work is called CODEX (Countable systems of Ordinary Differential Equations by eXtrapolation). As the ideas of adaptivity used in the algorithm have a lot of structural similarities to packages developed at the Konrad-Zuse-Zentrum for the solution of partial differential equations, slightly modified parts of these programs could be implemented within CODEX. In particular the data structures play an important role for the development of adaptive algorithms. CODEX is written in the language C and consists of about 4000 lines of source code (80 Kbyte). The program is divided into four main parts:

(i) The time stepping module which is based on BORNEMANN'S KASTIX [8], extended by routines controlling the transformation in  $ H_{\rho,\alpha} $ - spaces (files: euler.c, extrapolation.c, transform.c).

(ii) The solution module, which performs Euler steps by means of the discrete Galerkin method, including assembling of the Galerkin equations, error estimation and control, handling of a family of basis expansions of solutions, numerical preprocessing and summation control, dynamic administration of the associated data structures. The solution of the arising (small) linear systems for the expansion coefficients is done by Gauss elimination (files: assemble.c, distbasic.c, distinter.c, estimate.c, gauss.c, solve.c).