## INTRODUCTION

An initial value problem for a countable system of ordinary differential equations (CODE) consists of a (in general infinite) sequence of single ordinary differential equations. Hence a CODE can be considered as an ordinary differential equation in a sequence space. The numerical treatment of such systems has become more and more interesting, since CODE's appear frequently in chemistry, physics, biology and medicine. For example, the modeling of a polymerization process in chemistry, where single molecules (monomers) are linked together to long polymer chains (consisting of up to  $ 10^{6} $ monomers), leads to as many single equations as polymer chains can arise during the reaction. Since in general this number is not known a priori (sometimes not even the scale), it often must be assumed to be infinite. Similar models can be found for soot formation mechanisms arising in smog reactions [21] or combustion [31] and for dust formation in stellar winds [22] in astrophysics. Other examples are master-equations in biology and chemistry [28], branching processes [12] and Kolmogorov equations [29] in statistics. Common to all these problems is, that the solutions (as far as they are available) have a special structure, e.g. they can be interpreted as probability densities which are in some sense similar to well-known probability distributions. This has been exploited to get quantitative results for special applications. However, the methods in use are frequently only valid for a small class of problems, because a lot of additional assumptions are necessary. For example the method of moments [21] applied for problems of polyreaction kinetics needs the type of the distribution expected to be a solution, the so-called lumping [4] requires deep insight into the process and introduces unknown modeling errors in the case of nonlinear problems. The popular quasi-steady-state approximation (QSSA), which can be regarded as a change of the modeling has disadvantages discussed elsewhere [19], [9]. The use of a direct large scale integration usually is impossible for storage and time reasons. Other techniques are the so-called continuous modeling (transforming the CODE into a partial differential equation), which leads to theoretical difficulties [23] and the use of discrete Fourier transforms, which are very time-consuming [39].

Mathematical theory concerning CODE's has been developed for many years, a survey is given in the monograph of DEIMLING [12]. Nevertheless, the computational treatment of CODE's has not become as important as the treatment of partial differential equations (PDE's) so far – a fact that can be recognized by looking into textbooks about abstract differential equations, which actually should cover both PDE's and CODE's. Moreover, there are no numerical methods which try to be a general approach to this class of problems and 'nearly nothing has been done concerning qualitative behavior of solutions' [12].