holds for $n=0,1,\ldots$. Moreover, in this case the associated orthogonal polynomials can be generated by a three-term-recurrence formula. We will not check these conditions for the special weight function $\Psi_{\rho,\alpha}$ here, since the construction of the corresponding orthogonal polynomials of a discrete variable is well known in the literature. For example, the discrete Laguerre polynomials associated to the geometric distribution have been studied by GOTTLIEB [25] in 1938. CHARLIER has described the polynomials named after him in 1906. For the modified discrete Laguerre polynomials we will follow the considerations of LESKY [36], [37] and the textbook of NIKIFOROV and UVAROV [42], which gives a modern survey about orthogonal polynomials. For a group theoretical classification we refer to the work of KOORNWINDER (e.g. [35]). Properties of discrete orthogonal polynomials are given by ASKEY and GASPER [1], [2], [24] and others. This is only a sketchy account of the abundant literature in the field. Thus some of the results proven in this chapter (in particular in Section 2.2) may already be known to the experts.

A standard technique for the construction of the classical (continuous) orthogonal polynomials is the use of so-called Rodrigues formulas. It has been shown e.g in [36] and [42], that for some types of discrete weight functions there are discrete Rodrigues formulas. A classification of these weight functions can be found in [10], where generating functions are the starting point. In [42], discrete hypergeometric equations are considered, whereas in [36] a variational approach is chosen. In this section, we begin with the proof of a given Rodrigues formula. For ease of writing sometimes the forward product

 $$ \left(a\right)_{n}:=a\left(a+1\right)\cdots\left(a+n-1\right),\ a\in\mathbb{R}, $$ 

will be used.

#### THEOREM 2.1. The Rodrigues formula

 $$ l_{n}(s;\rho,\alpha)=\frac{(1+\alpha)_{n}}{n!}\Psi_{\rho,\alpha}(s)^{-1}\;\Delta^{n}\left\{C^{\rho,\alpha}\;\rho^{s-1}\left(\begin{matrix}{s-1+\alpha}\\ {s-1-n}\\ \end{matrix}\right)\right\} $$ 

generates polynomials  $  l_n(s) = l_n(s; \rho, \alpha)  $ which are orthogonal with respect to the scalar product (2.1) for  $ 0 < \rho < 1 $ and  $ \alpha > -1 $. The orthogonality relation reads

 $$ (l_{m}\;,\;l_{n})^{\rho,\alpha}=\delta_{n m}\;\gamma_{n}^{\rho,\alpha}\;,\;\gamma_{n}^{\rho,\alpha}:=\rho^{n}\left(\begin{matrix}{n+\alpha}\\ {n}\\ \end{matrix}\right)\;. $$ 

The polynomials  $ l_{n}(s;\rho,\alpha) $ will be called modified discrete Laguerre polynomials.