just the countable system (1.3). In the following we will denote the concentration of a polymer of degree s at time t by  $ P_{s}(t) $ respectively  $ D_{s}(t) $.

The modeling of free radical polymerization processes leads to a system of CODE's, with one component  $ P_s(t) $ denoting the so-called radical polymer and the second component  $ D_s(t) $ describing the dead polymer. The complete reaction consists of some single steps, e.g. chain addition, combination (convolution), chain transfer and an additional source term. A model of technological relevance (MMA polymerization) has to be described by a system of at least  $ 2 \cdot 10^4 $ ordinary differential equations. By means of the discrete Galerkin method this number can be reduced to 10 - 15 differential equations for a solution with technical accuracy ( $ 10^{-2} $) and controlled approximation error. This makes the simulation of the complete model possible even on a small workstation. In this case, the Galerkin approximations are based on the geometric distribution, which is the distribution of choice for free radical polymerization processes. As shown in [9] the error estimation works well for the dead polymer and most of the process time for the radical polymer too. But there remains one gap, which is one of the starting points of this work. Table 1.1 shows the error estimation  $ \varepsilon_n $ of the Galerkin approximation of the radical polymer in the first 5 seconds of the process for truncation indices  $ n = 5 $ and  $ n = 10 $. The dispersion coefficient  $ d $ is a measure for the width of the distribution  $ P_s(t) $ (see Chapter 2).


<table border=1 style='margin: auto; word-wrap: break-word;'><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>time  $ t $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ \epsilon_{5}(t) $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ \epsilon_{10}(t) $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>d</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ 10^{-2} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ 3 \cdot 10^{-2} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ 7 \cdot 10^{-2} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>1.35</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ 10^{-1} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ 3 \cdot 10^{-2} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ 9 \cdot 10^{-2} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>1.34</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ 5 \cdot 10^{-1} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ 2 \cdot 10^{-2} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ 3 \cdot 10^{-2} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>1.43</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>1</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ 8 \cdot 10^{-2} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ 5 \cdot 10^{-2} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>1.61</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>5</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ 0.06 \cdot 10^{-2} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ 0.01 \cdot 10^{-2} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>2.00</td></tr></table>

<div style="text-align: center;">TABLE 1.1 Error estimations at the beginning of a polymerization</div>


We observe that the error estimation does not look reasonable between t = 0.01 and t = 1.0. As an explanation, we note that depending on the values of the respective rate coefficient and the source term, the chain addition, the so-called transfer and termination terms or a mixture of all these effects may dominate the process during the initial phase. This can lead to solutions similar to the Poisson distribution (compare Example 1.1), the geometric distribution (see Example 1.3) or even to a piecewise nearly constant solution. Thus it can happen, that a Galerkin method based on the geometric distribution yields bad results. Only for t > 1 the termination steps of a free radical system definitely play the dominating role, increasing the concentration of short polymers. The chain length distribution  $ P_s(t) $ becomes similar to a geometric distribution after