As a really new approach a discrete Galerkin method has been suggested by DEUFLHARD and WULKOW [18]. This Galerkin method is based on orthogonal polynomials of a discrete variable constructed by means of a weighted discrete inner product. The discrete variable represents the sequence index of the CODE and plays the role of a ‘space’ variable in a partial differential equation. The weight function determining the inner product is chosen to reflect certain structures of the problem. Besides it depends on a time-depending parameter, which can be adapted by a so-called moving weight function condition. As examples for such weight functions the geometric distribution and the Poisson distribution have been used in [18]. In this way, the countable system is discretized by the Galerkin method in a weighted sequence space, such that differential equations for the Galerkin coefficients are obtained by use of analytical properties of the orthogonal polynomials. The discrete Galerkin method is comparable to a method of lines with moving basis functions in the field of partial differential equations. In [9] and [52] the method has been developed to such a level, that problems of technological interest – polymerization of Methyl Methacrylate (modeled by a system of CODE’s), heterogeneous polymer degradation – can be solved very efficiently now. Additionally, a computational cheap a posteriori estimation of the approximation error can be obtained.

In the approach sketched above there are some open points, concerning the theory of CODE's in certain weighted sequence spaces, the convergence theory of the Galerkin method in these spaces, the adaptive control of the Galerkin approximations and the treatment of problems containing different types of weight functions. The present work clarifies these questions and extends the Galerkin method to more general problems. This is done by combining concepts from the numerical treatment of ODE's with adaptive approaches from PDE's. An important aspect is the fact, that a CODE resembles more to a PDE with a discrete space variable than to an extension of a finite dimensional ODE system. Discretization first in time, in theory of PDE's better known as ROTHE's method [49], leads to adaptive time-steps really belonging to the sequence space problem – following ideas of BORNEMANN [8]. This technique permits an adaptive matching between the requirements of the time-step control and the 'space' discretization. As time discretizations explicit and (semi-) implicit Euler schemes are used, the occurring subproblems (projection into the sequence spaces, countable systems of algebraic equations) are attacked by a new (i.e. extended) discrete Galerkin method. For that, a two-parameter family of weight functions is introduced, connecting properties of some basic probability distributions. These weight functions lead to a two-parameter scale of weighted sequence spaces, for which the theory of CODE's is developed.