## Chapter 1

## Introduction

Macromolecular processes play an important role both in science and engineering including problems of industrial relevance such as polyreaction kinetics. In spite of their importance, their mathematical and especially computational treatment has been unsatisfactory for quite a time. Typically, the mathematical modelling ends up at a huge system of ordinary differential equations consisting of thousands up to millions of differential equations corresponding to the chain length of the macromolecule under consideration. Direct stiff integration of such systems is prohibitive due to both storage and CPU time limitations. The traditional statistical moment treatment is often unsatisfactory due to the unsolvable problem of how to choose the truncation index so that at least the first few moments are sufficiently accurate. A further approach, the generation of a PDE by making a continuous variable out of the chain length, which is a discrete variable by its very nature, suffers from the fact that it induces ill-posedness for reaction mechanisms of practical interest. In this situation, Deuflhard and Wulkow in [13] had suggested a new method that they called discrete Galerkin method. This method is adaptive in the sense that it either controls or at least monitors the truncation index occurring in the Galerkin approximation.

In Section 2 below, a first idea of the class of problems to be treated is given, in order to exemplify the modelling structure. Next, two variants of the discrete Galerkin method are discussed in some detail. First, in Section 3, a method of lines type approach comparable to the well-known MOL for PDE's is presented. It is quite easy to understand and allows monitoring the number of degrees of freedom to be used in the Galerkin approximation. Second, in Section 4, a more sophisticated variant is described that has similarities with a Rothe method for PDE's. This variant permits an efficient time dependent variation of the truncation index according to the required accuracy of the Galerkin approximation. Both variants have been implemented in software that has solved an impressive number of realistic problems from science and engineering. Examples to illustrate the efficiency of the approach are inserted.