between the reactor  $ (T_{\mathrm{R}}) $ and the jacket  $ (T_{\mathrm{j}}) $ and is given by eq 2.

 $$ \dot{Q}_{\mathrm{c o n d u c t i o n}}=k\cdot A_{\mathrm{R}}\cdot(T_{\mathrm{R}}-T_{\mathrm{j}}) $$ 

In this context, the thermal transmittance or overall heat transfer coefficient (k), which describes the heat transfer from the tempering jacket through the reactor wall into the reaction medium, is the central engineering parameter. The thermal transmittance can be divided into three separate heat transfer steps and calculated using eq 3. The first step is the heat transfer from the reaction medium to the reactor wall represented by the inner heat transfer coefficient ( $ \alpha_{R} $). It is followed by the conductive heat transfer through the reactor wall characterized by the quotient of the thickness of the wall ( $ d_{wall} $) and the thermal conductivity of its material ( $ \lambda_{wall} $). The third step is the heat transfer from the reactor wall to the cooling/heating fluid of the jacket ( $ \alpha_{f} $).

 $$ \frac{1}{k}=\frac{1}{\alpha_{\mathrm{R}}}+\frac{d_{\mathrm{w a l l}}}{\lambda_{\mathrm{w a l l}}}+\frac{1}{\alpha_{\mathrm{j}}} $$ 

The heat transfer coefficients can be derived from the dimensionless Nusselt number  $ (Nu = \frac{\alpha L}{\lambda}) $ for a specific characteristic length (L). Several empiric relationships exist, describing the dependency of the Nusselt number from the flow conditions represented by the Reynolds number (Re =  $ \frac{\rho \cdot v \cdot L}{\eta} $) and the thermal properties of the medium (Prandtl number:  $ Pr = \frac{\eta c_p}{\lambda} $). Besides flow velocity ( $ \nu $), the physical properties that are important in this context are the density ( $ \rho $), the dynamic viscosity ( $ \eta $), the thermal conductivity ( $ \lambda $), and the specific heat capacity ( $ c_p $) of the fluids involved in the process. The applied Nusselt correlations, which are summarized in the Supporting Information (eqs S1–S6), are dependent on the stirrer type and taken from the literature $ ^{41} $. The jacket fluid used in the simulations is modeled after the thermo-fluid Malotherm XC. All physical parameters used in the equations are summarized in the Supporting Information (eqs S18–S21) and taken from the product data sheet. $ ^{42} $ In the simulations, glass reactors with varying sizes between 0.5 and 15.0 L are used. The geometrical data of the reactors are based on those of the Polyclave (0.5, 1.0, 2.0, and 5.0 L) and Kiloclave (15.0 L) series from Büchi (Büchi AG, Uster, Switzerland) and summarized in the Supporting Information (Table S1). The heat balance was implemented in Predici in the form of interconnected user scripts (see blue and red boxes in Figure 1) and is influenced by several parameters (orange boxes). The heat introduced by the stirrer is negligible and thus can be estimated using the Newton number ( $ Ne_t $ see eqs S43 and S44). $ ^{43} $ This was done for different simulation results and is shown in the Supporting Information (see Figure S2). The equations for these calculations are taken from the literature. $ ^{44} $ The heat introduced by the stirrer during the reaction is well below 10% compared to the heat of reaction in all setups investigated. The reason for this is the highly diluted reaction solution, which leads to a less significant increase in viscosity.

The implemented heat balance with an automated calculation of the heat transfer parameters makes it possible to quickly check the effect of parameter adjustments (e.g., polymerization recipe or temperature) on the thermal behavior of the chemical process. These data can assist in the scale-up of a polymerization process. To generate reliable and useful data, it is necessary to have an exact knowledge of the reaction kinetics. If the kinetics of the reaction or crucial physical properties such as the viscosity of the reaction mixture are not known from practice or literature, the model has to be carefully validated using experimental data.



This approach was tested based on the anionic polymerization of styrene conducted in cyclohexane. These reactions are often carried out in a temperature range of 30–60 °C. The polymerization kinetics are implemented in the form of a model containing only the initiation, chain propagation, and deactivation steps (eqs 4–6). The involved species are the initiator sec-butyllithium (sec-BuLi), the monomer styrene (St), the propagating polymer chain with n monomeric units ( $ P_{ns,s}^{*} $), and the terminated polymer chain ( $ P_{m+n}^{dead} $). The rate coefficient of the initiation is calculated from the reaction rates reported by Hsieh. $ ^{45} $ The deactivation reaction step and its rate coefficient ( $ k_{d} $) describe a thermally driven LiH elimination that occurs at higher temperatures. $ ^{46,47} $ The propagation rate coefficient $ ^{48} $ (Table 1), as well as the physical properties of the

<div style="text-align: center;">Table 1. Reaction Rate Coefficients of the Initiation  $ (k_i) $, Propagation  $ (k_{\mathrm{p,ss}}) $, and Deactivation Step  $ (k_d) $ for the Anionic Polymerization of Styrene Carried Out in Cyclohexane with sec-BuLi as the Initiator $ ^a $</div>



<table border=1 style='margin: auto; word-wrap: break-word;'><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>rate coefficient</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>A_{f} [different units]</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>E_{a}/R [K]</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>k_{i}</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>8.85 \times 10^{9} [s^{-1}]</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>7.18 \times 10^{3}</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>k_{p,ss}^{48}</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>7.73 \times 10^{9} [L^{0.5} mol^{-0.5} s^{-1}]</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>8.25 \times 10^{3}</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>k_{d}^{47}</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>3.92 \times 10^{6} [s^{-1}]</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>8.70 \times 10^{3}</td></tr></table>

 $ ^{a} $The constants are written in form of temperature-dependent Arrhenius parameters with the frequency factor  $ (A_{f}) $ and the activation energy divided by the universal gas constants  $ (E_{a}/R) $. The rate coefficient of the initiation is calculated from the reaction rates reported by Hsieh. $ ^{45} $

involved species $ ^{4,39,44,49-51} $ (see eqs S22–S37), are taken from the literature. The viscosity of the polymer solution is calculated using a combination of the Mark–Houwink (eq S39) and Huggins equation (eq S38). $ ^{7,52} $ A similar approach was applied by Cortese et al. in a computational fluid dynamic study dealing with the anionic polymerization of styrene in microractors. $ ^{53} $ It should be noted that the viscosity model neglects the effect introduced by the aggregation of living chains. The heat of polymerization ( $ \Delta H_p $) of styrene was set to  $ -60 $ kJ mol $ ^{-1} $. $ ^{54} $

 $$ s-BuLi+St\xrightarrow{k_{i}}P_{1,s}^{*} $$ 

 $$ P_{n,s}^{*}+\mathrm{S t}\xrightarrow{k_{\mathrm{p},\mathrm{s s}}}P_{n+1,s}^{*} $$ 

 $$ P_{n}^{*}\xrightarrow{k_{d}}P_{n}^{dead} $$ 

The anionic species involved in the polymerization form different aggregates depending on their properties and their interaction with the solvent. In the case of the initiator sec-BuLi, there are different findings in the literature concerning this behavior and its effects on the reaction order. $ ^{55} $ While the reaction order of sec-BuLi in aromatic solvents is 4, some studies reported a reaction order of nearly 1 in the case of aliphatic solvents such as cyclohexane. $ ^{45,55} $ Living polystyrene anions with their counterion lithium arrange themselves as dimers in cyclohexane. $ ^{48,56} $ Due to this