aggregation, the reaction order concerning the living chain is also changed. This effect could be represented in the model using effective rate coefficients for the initiation and propagation reactions that are functions of the initiator and chain concentrations. Because different reaction orders for sec-BuLi are given in the literature, a first-order reaction was assumed for the model. The effective rate coefficient of the propagation reaction can be calculated using eq 7 based on the finding of Steube et al. $ ^{48} $ The equation is slightly adapted to fit into Predici's framework. As there are no chains formed at the beginning of the simulated reaction, the propagation rate coefficients are instead dependent on the initiator concentration in the first simulation step to prevent a division by zero error in the computation.

 $$ \frac{\mathrm{d}[M]}{\mathrm{d}t}=-k_{\mathrm{p},\mathrm{ss}}.[P_{n,s}^{*}]^{1/2}.[M]=-\underbrace{\frac{k_{\mathrm{p},\mathrm{ss}}}{[P_{n,s}^{*}]^{1/2}}}_{k_{\mathrm{p},\mathrm{ss},\mathrm{eff}}}.[P_{n,s}^{*}].[M] $$ 

In a second step, the kinetic model is extended to a copolymerization model that includes isoprene as the second monomer. This extended model adds the propagation step of isoprene as well as cross-polymerization steps between living chains with either of the two monomers. The extended copolymerization model is described in more detail in the Supporting Information (eqs S7–S17). The rate coefficients and copolymerization parameters, $ ^{48} $ as well as the temperature-dependent functions of the physical parameters of isoprene, are taken from the literature. $ ^{39,57} $

In addition to the heat transfer behavior, the pressure inside the reactor is another important safety parameter. The pressure in the reactor  $ (p_R) $ is calculated from the partial pressure of the components  $ (p_i) $ in the reaction mixture, their mole fraction  $ (x_p) $, which can be derived from the concentration values of the species), and the pressure of the noncondensable material  $ (p_n) $ using an equation (eq 8) already applied in a recent study. $ ^{39} $ All values of pressure are given in the unit bar. The calculation of the pressure of the noncondensable material is shown in the Supporting Information (eq S40).

 $$ p_{\mathrm{R}}=\overline{p}_{0}+\sum_{i}x_{i}\cdot p_{i} $$ 

The temperature-dependent partial pressure is determined with the Antoine equation (eq 9). The Antoine equation parameters for styrene, isoprene, and cyclohexane are summarized in Table S4. $ ^{58-60} $

 $$ \ln(p_{i})=A-\frac{B}{C+T} $$ 

## RESULTS

As already mentioned, the above-described process model combines the simulation of safety-relevant parameters centered around the thermal behavior of the reactor with the strength of Predici in the prediction of polymer properties. To show the capability of this model, the anionic polymerization of styrene in cyclohexane was investigated regarding the influence of parameters in three areas: first, the reaction mixture and conditions in the form of the monomer content and starting temperature; second, the effects of different process parameters regarding the stirrer and jacket of the reactor; and third, the changes in the reactor scale (scale-up). In a last step, the extended copolymerization model was tested. The performance of the model is evaluated using four simulated process variables, the monomer conversion (from now on referred to as conversion), the number-average molar mass of the polymer (referring to the polymer molecular characteristics), the temperature of the reaction mixture, and the pressure inside the reactor. This work focuses exclusively on the development and implementation of the model and its predictions with regard to the questions mentioned above. However, it is important to carefully validate the model based on experimental data in future studies. Reaction calorimetry is a method that could be used to validate heat transfer parameters such as heat transfer coefficients as well as the reaction heat. The heat transfer coefficients are calculated by the model using empirical correlations, which assumes ideal conditions as, for example, an ideal flow behavior in the jacket, and are known to have varying degrees of deviation from the experiments. $ ^{[41,43]} $ Furthermore, some material properties, especially viscosity, have to be experimentally validated.



Temperature and Monomer Content. Initially, the starting temperature was varied between 20 and 60 °C with monomer contents of 5, 10, 20, and 30 wt % with a target molecular weight of 100 kg mol⁻¹. All reactions are simulated in a 0.5 L stirred tank reactor with a spiral stirrer (diameter: 40 mm), and a stirring speed of 250 min⁻¹. The inlet temperature of the thermo-fluid was set to the starting temperature with a volume flow rate of 10 L min⁻¹. The simulated temperature and conversion profiles are shown in Figure 2. Due to the strong differences in the reaction rates introduced by concentration and temperature, the profiles are plotted with a logarithmic scale for better visualization.

<table border=1 style='margin: auto; width: max-content;'>
  <thead><tr><th style='text-align: center;'>Time [min]</th><th style='text-align: center;'>w1%=5 T=20 °C [°C]</th><th style='text-align: center;'>w1%=5 T=40 °C [°C]</th><th style='text-align: center;'>w1%=5 T=60 °C [°C]</th><th style='text-align: center;'>w1%=10 T=20 °C [°C]</th><th style='text-align: center;'>w1%=20 T=20 °C [°C]</th><th style='text-align: center;'>w1%=30 T=20 °C [°C]</th></tr></thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr><td style='text-align: center;'>0.01</td><td style='text-align: center;'>38</td><td style='text-align: center;'>38</td><td style='text-align: center;'>60</td><td style='text-align: center;'>60</td><td style='text-align: center;'>60</td><td style='text-align: center;'>20</td></tr>
    <tr><td style='text-align: center;'>0.1</td><td style='text-align: center;'>38</td><td style='text-align: center;'>38</td><td style='text-align: center;'>60</td><td style='text-align: center;'>60</td><td style='text-align: center;'>60</td><td style='text-align: center;'>20</td></tr>
    <tr><td style='text-align: center;'>1</td><td style='text-align: center;'>38</td><td style='text-align: center;'>38</td><td style='text-align: center;'>60</td><td style='text-align: center;'>60</td><td style='text-align: center;'>60</td><td style='text-align: center;'>20</td></tr>
    <tr><td style='text-align: center;'>10</td><td style='text-align: center;'>38</td><td style='text-align: center;'>38</td><td style='text-align: center;'>60</td><td style='text-align: center;'>60</td><td style='text-align: center;'>60</td><td style='text-align: center;'>20</td></tr>
    <tr><td style='text-align: center;'>100</td><td style='text-align: center;'>38</td><td style='text-align: center;'>38</td><td style='text-align: center;'>60</td><td style='text-align: center;'>60</td><td style='text-align: center;'>60</td><td style='text-align: center;'>20</td></tr>
    <tr><td style='text-align: center;'>1000</td><td style='text-align: center;'>38</td><td style='text-align: center;'>38</td><td style='text-align: center;'>60</td><td style='text-align: center;'>60</td><td style='text-align: center;'>60</td><td style='text-align: center;'>20</td></tr>
  </tbody>
</table>

<div style="text-align: center;">Figure 2. Simulated temperature and conversion profiles for varying monomer content (5 wt %: straight lines, 10 wt %: dashed lines, 20 wt % dotted lines, and 30 wt %: dashed/dotted lines) and starting temperature (20 °C: black, 40 °C: red, and 60 °C: blue).</div>


As it can be seen in the conversion profiles, the anionic polymerization of styrene in cyclohexane is very sensitive to the change of temperature and the monomer concentration. The faster reaction rates are accompanied by an equally fast rise in the temperature due to the high reaction heat, which is released in a shorter time frame. To quantify this effect, a couple of parameters were extracted from the simulated data. In Table 2, the time after conversion of 0.95 was reached  $ (t_{0.95}) $ and the number-average molecular mass at this conversion  $ (M_{n,0.95}) $, the maximal temperature  $ (T_{\text{max}}) $ and the time in