## INTRODUCTION

Polymers belong to the most important materials in our technology. In a polymerization process single molecules are linked together to long polymer chains. The mathematical modeling of a polymerization (see e.g. [35]) leads to as many single differential equations as polymer chains can arise during the reaction. In general this number is not known a priori (sometimes not even the scale), but must be assumed to be very large ( $ 10^4 - 10^6 $ in realistic examples) or even infinite. The resulting system is then called a countable system of ordinary differential equations (CODE). Countable systems appear also in other fields of chemistry, in physics [23], statistics and economics [20].

For the numerical treatment of CODE's there exist several methods, which have been originally developed for special problems in the applications. However, there is no comprehensive numerical approach up to now and "nearly nothing has been done concerning qualitative behavior of solutions" [13] in the theory.

As a new numerical approach, a discrete Galerkin method has been suggested by DEUFLHARD and the author [19]. Thereby orthogonal functions of a discrete variable are used to approximate the solution of a countable system. The method has been worked out and implemented for problems from polymer chemistry in the program package MACRON [1].

This paper presents the new algorithm CODEX, which extends the ideas of the discrete Galerkin method and avoids some drawbacks of MACRON, which arise from the fact, that it corresponds to the method of lines. A countable system is considered now as an evolution equation in a sequence space. Following ideas of BORNEMANN [6], [7], this equation is discretized in time first. The resulting stationary subproblem to perform a time step is then solved approximately by a Galerkin method in a scale of Hilbert spaces generated by a two-parameter family of weight functions. It turns out, that CODEX performs well for a wide class of problems with solutions having structural similarities to the suggested weight functions. The theoretical and numerical concepts can easily be applied to similar approaches in weighted sequence or function spaces.

After introducing some very common model problems, in Section 1 a basis independent theory of countable systems in the sequence spaces  $ H_{\rho,\alpha} $ is derived. Section 2 is concerned with the construction and examination of basis functions of  $ H_{\rho,\alpha} $, which are determined by the so-called modified discrete Laguerre polynomials. In Section 3 the algorithm is outlined very briefly, then the time discretization scheme and the Galerkin method in  $ H_{\rho,\alpha} $ are discussed. Section 4 illustrates the efficiency of CODEX on examples from polymer chemistry.