the concentrations and rates available at the begin of the time step t are used for the whole step. This aspect has only an effect on the local accuracy of the MC method. By using mean values or interpolation of the deterministic results along the time step, an improvement is possible. However, after trying different approaches, we decided to use the sufficiently good explicit scheme for all simulations presented in Section Numerical Experiments.

## Treatment of Reaction Steps

Apart from the computation of rates based on results of the deterministic method, up to this point the MC part of the algorithm looks quite similar to well-known approaches. This will change when we consider the treatment of the single reaction steps. For an illustration we choose a propagation step of a copolymerization scheme:

 $$ P_{s}^{1}+M_{2}\stackrel{k_{p12}}{\rightarrow}P_{s+1}^{2}, $$ 

selected at some time, where a monomer  $ M_2 $ adds to a chain with a different end-group such that this characteristic property of the molecule changes (typical terminal model). Related to  $ P^1 $ and  $ P^2 $ are overall concentrations  $ \lambda_0(P^1) = \sum_s P_s^1 $ and  $ \lambda_0(P^2) = \sum_s P_s^2 $ as well as MC ensembles  $ E_1 $ and  $ E_2 $ with numbers  $ m_1 $ and  $ m_2 $. At first, a single chain  $ e^1 $ has to be chosen randomly from the  $ P^1 $-ensemble  $ E_1 $. Now one could simply shift  $ e^1 $ to the other ensemble, however, this would disregard the different concentration levels and ensemble numbers. Instead, the reaction has different effects on the two ensembles. The number  $ m_a^2 $ of affected chains of type  $ P^2 $ is given by:

 $$ m_{a}^{2}=\frac{\lambda_{0}(P^{1})}{\lambda_{0}(P^{2})}\frac{m_{2}}{m_{1}}. $$ 

For  $ P^1 = P^2 $ we have  $ m_a^2 = 1 $ leading to the classical treatment. For the general case  $ m_a^2 \neq 1 $ the update of the ensembles involved requires some consideration. Firstly, the chain  $ e^1 $ has to be removed from the  $ P^1 $-ensemble. Since we want to keep  $ m^1 $ constant, then some other chain  $ e^2 $ has to be chosen and copied. The simplest way to do this is to select an entity  $ e^2 $ out of an ensemble  $ E_1 $ by using another random number  $ z_3 \in [1, m_1] $. Actually, if the ensemble is large and represents the chain-length distribution rather accurately, a random selection will automatically be proportional to the actual concentrations of the single polymer molecules. More complex copy strategies have been tested and will be discussed elsewhere. For  $ P^2 $ a certain number of chains has to be replaced by  $ e^2 $. If  $ m_a^2 < 1 $, we use another random number  $ z_4 $ to replace a chain if  $ z_4 < m_a^2 $. For that, one chain of ensemble  $ E_2 $ is randomly deleted and replaced by  $ e^2 $. If  $ m_a^2 \geq 1 $, a respective number of chains in  $ E_2 $ is replaced by copies of  $ e^1 $. Summarizing, for a single reaction  $ R_\mu $ the algorithm works as follows:



1. Select a chain  $ e^{1} $ from the ensemble  $ E_{1} $.

2. If  $ R_{\mu} $ is a bimolecular polymer reaction, select a partner chain  $ e^2 \in E_2 $.

3. If only one distribution is affected: change selected chains accordingly.

4. Otherwise: Compute the ensemble factor(s)  $ m_{a}^{i} $, replace the selected chain(s) in ensembles of distributions on the left-hand side and copy them. Apply weighting replacement to the ensembles on the right-hand side.

For some reaction step patterns a MC module has been implemented in a prototype version of Predici (compare Table 4 in ref. $ ^{[1]} $) The MC rates per deterministic step length  $ \tau $ use the molar concentrations of low molecular species like monomers, initiators and transfer agent and the statistical moments  $ \lambda_i(P) = \sum s'P_s $ of polymer species. The following Table 2 lists those rates when the first reactant on the left-hand side is selected first.

## Interpolation

If we want to use results from the MC part of the algorithm for output or even the computation of deterministic reaction rates, a technique to compute relatively smooth chain-length dependent information is required. Each chain  $ e \in E $ provides (not unique) relations between chain-length s and the property indices  $ i_1, i_2, \ldots $. However, in the numerical examples we require an average  $ i_2 $ (number of comonomers in a chain) for a given s. In Figure 7 an automatic regression of the graphic software has been used to compute the mean values, but such a regression requires some prescribed, parameterized function (linear, polynomial, exponential, etc.) and is only suited for a post-processing. During the time step evolution, we apply a more sophisticated algorithm:

<div style="text-align: center;">Table 2. Monte-Carlo reaction rates for selected elemental reaction steps.</div>



<table border=1 style='margin: auto; word-wrap: break-word;'><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>Pattern</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>Name</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>MC-rate/ $ \tau $</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ I + A \rightarrow P_{1} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>Initiation</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ k_{\lambda_{0}(Q)}^{\text{CICA}} m_{P} $</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ P_{s} + A \rightarrow Q_{s+1} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>Propagation</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ k_{C_{A}}m_{P} $</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ P_{s} + A \rightarrow Q_{s} + B $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>Transition</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ k_{C_{A}}m_{P} $</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ P_{s} + Q_{r} \rightarrow D_{s+r} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>Recombination</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ k_{\lambda_{0}}(Q)m_{P} $</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ P_{s} + Q_{r} \rightarrow D_{s} + D_{r} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>Disproportionation</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ k_{\lambda_{0}}(Q)m_{P} $</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ P_{s} + A \rightarrow Q_{s} + T_{1} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>Transfer</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ k_{C_{A}}m_{P} $</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ P_{s} + D_{r} \rightarrow Q_{s} + T_{r} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>Long-chain branching</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ k_{\lambda_{1}}(D)m_{P} $</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ P_{s} + D_{r} \xrightarrow{r} Q_{s+r} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>Cross-linking</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ k_{\lambda_{1}}(D)m_{P} $</td></tr></table>