in order to examine a composition drift in a copolymer system.

Therefore for a long while as an alternative to the deterministic approaches sketched above, stochastic methods are applied to polymer systems  $ [6-8] $ to name very few). The advantage of the resulting Monte-Carlo (MC) methods is, that they are (or at least seem to be) relatively simple to implement and provide quite general information. However, even on modern, parallelized systems, stochastic results of a sufficient accuracy (something which is naturally required from deterministic methods), still cost a lot of computing time. $ ^{[8]} $ Furthermore, error controls for MC methods are hardly to obtain without lengthy convergence tests. On the other hand, deterministic methods are superior in view of identification and optimization purposes, where it is necessary to deal with smooth, differentiable structures.

Summarizing we can state, that there are accurate deterministic (very efficient for one property) and comprehensive stochastic methods available, but mostly applied used in a quite separated manner. One exception is the work described in ref. $ ^{[9]} $, where a MC simulation is used as a postprocessing to results obtained by the balance distribution approach. In contrast to that approach, in this paper we will apply deterministic and stochastic methods in parallel, sometimes even depending on each other. We will show, how a skillful combination of both types of techniques can overcome the disadvantages of the single approaches and lead to detailed and efficient simulations. One basic idea is, that for polymer systems there is one special property — the chain length. There will always be more, often much more, monomer units along a polymer chain than counts for any other property. In our hybrid algorithm, the chain-length axis and the related chain-length distributions are treated by means of a deterministic approach, whereas all other property coordinates are represented by an ensemble of molecules of a MC method. As a consequence, only a relative small number of chains is necessary for the MC method, since the reaction rates can be obtained from the deterministic results within high accuracy. In order to develop this algorithm on a mathematical basis, the coupling has to be done by carefully studying the underlying chemical master equations (CMEs). Then — using certain limit processes — we can derive the coupling between deterministic and stochastic parts of the algorithm.

In contrast to refs. $ ^{[6-8]} $ and other comparable approaches, where the aim is to calculate the polymer chain length distribution (and sometimes additional properties) from probabilistic models, the hybrid approach suggested herein addresses the distribution of other properties (e.g., branching) by MC techniques. The chain length distribution, however, is computed by reaction kinetics using PREDICI or similar solvers.

In Section Theoretical Considerations of this article, the mathematical basics of master and rate equations for polymer kinetics are summarized and the theory of the coupling is derived. The distinction between the basic objects of master equation and reaction kinetics is essential for the comprehension of the hybrid approach; in particular it is essential to understand that the entire chain length distribution is the first (marginal) moment of the probability distribution underlying the master equation. Our hybrid approach contains the full chain length distribution and the associated marginal probability distribution for the other properties. It thus, at least in principle, allows to compute, e.g., all the moments of the chain length distribution as well as all the moments of the distributions of other properties. In order to work this out as clearly as possible, we added an overview over the basic aspects of the different modeling layers at the end of Section Hybrid Model.



In Section Algorithm, some technical issues of the algorithm, already implemented in a prototypical version of the program package Predici, are discussed. Finally some illustrative examples are presented in Section Numerical Experiments.

## Theoretical Considerations

Modeling polymer reaction kinetics basically means to describe certain phenomena occurring on a microscopic level and affecting the single monomeric units of a polymer chain — for example, the process of adding a monomer to a polymer molecule. The probability of such a single reaction, the position along the chain, the type of monomer and chain, etc., are all under consideration. The common notation for a propagation reaction:

 $$ P_{s}+M\stackrel{k_{p}}{\rightarrow}P_{s+1},s=1,2,\ldots $$ 

refers to the types of molecules involved:  $ P_s $ to the type polymer of chain length  $ s $,  $ M $ to the type monomer. If one wants to distinguish between polymers of type chain length  $ s $ with different additional properties, one has to add additional property indices. For example, we can distinguish between polymers with different branching index  $ j $ by introducing the polymer type  $ P_{sj} $. For a given instance in time let us denote the number of copies of polymers of type  $ P_{sj} $ by  $ n_{sj} $. Summation over the branching index  $ j $ yields the copy number  $ N_s = \sum_j n_{sj} $ of polymers of type  $ P_s $. If required, we can introduce several additional property indices  $ j_1, \ldots, j_m $ and different types of polymers  $ P^k $ such that in general we would have to consider molecular types  $ P_{sj_1, \ldots, j_m}^k $. For the sake of simplicity we will however restrict the following considerations to types  $ P_{sj} $ or  $ P_s $.