techniques used in polyreaction kinetics will need some thorough reconsideration in our present context. A first step in this direction has been performed recently by Engblom [13], obviously unaware of the above quoted more general work. He has worked out a method of lines (MOL) approach, i.e. first state space discretization, then time discretization, so that one is left with a system of ordinary differential equations (ODEs). In what follows, we propose an approach in the frame of a Rothe method (ROM), i.e. first time discretization, then state space discretization, which leads to a sequence of boundary value problems and thus conveniently allows for adaptively chosen state subspaces. This so-called adaptive Rothe method has been introduced by Bornemann [4, 2] in 1990 for scalar parabolic equations and extended by Lang to parabolic systems of reaction-diffusion type up to challenging real life problems [25]. Already in 1992, Wulkow had transferred the approach to polyreaction kinetics in his thesis [33, 34]. The ROM will be combined with a Galerkin h-p-mehod in higher dimensions which already has been successfully applied to similar problems with continuous property coordinates [22].

The article is organized as follows. In Section 1, we first set the scene and introduce the chemical master equation focusing on its discrete PDE structure. Moreover, we discuss the two possible discretization options for this discrete PDE, the MOL and the ROM, in view of adaptivity with respect to state space. On this basis, in Section 2, we work out details of discrete Galerkin methods for the CME. Adaptive Galerkin methods in one dimension are recalled to necessary detail and extended via a tensor product approach to multiple dimensions. For the arising reduced linear systems to be solved, they require the efficient numerical evaluation of matrix elements and right-hand sides, where Gauss-Christoffel summation plays an important role. Finally, in Section 3, we apply our approach to two challenging model problems exhibiting typical features of stochastic reaction kinetics of variable degree.

## 1 Preliminary Considerations

In this section, we first formulate the chemical master equation (CME) and reveal its structure as a discrete partial differential equation (PDE). From this perspective, we then discuss two options concerning the order of time and state space discretization in view of adaptivity.