## Introduction

In recent years, based on the insight that stochastic effects are of crucial importance in the understanding of gene regulatory networks and signalling cascades, an increasingly growing interest in stochastic modelling approaches to chemical reaction kinetics arose [12, 29, 26, 27]. As a consequence, the design of efficient numerical techniques and reliable approximations schemes for the solution of the chemical master equation (CME) is now an active field of research. Almost exclusively, these approaches treat the CME via Monte-Carlo techniques, generating a statistically large ensemble of realizations of the associated continuous-time / discrete-state-space Markov jump process. The most prominent of these approaches is the stochastic simulation algorithm due to Gillespie in [20, 17]. This algorithm, however, requires an update of the system at each time when one of the reaction channels fires, thus causing enormous computational cost in the case of highly reactive systems. Therefore, research has mainly concentrated on how to improve the efficiency of this kind of algorithm (cf. [16, 19, 5, 28, 1, 21, 6, 30]). In contrast to this line of research, a method for solving the CME by a dynamical low-rank approximation has recently been introduced by Jahnke and Huisinga [24].

The present paper deals with an alternative idea based on a change of perspective. In fact, from a mathematical point of view, the CME may be understood as a countable system of ordinary differential equations (CODE) or, equivalently, as a discrete partial differential equation (PDE). For its numerical treatment, the main challenge is the fact that each single state of the state space corresponds to one degree of freedom in the CME. Even in case of a small system containing, e.g., only three molecular species and at most  $ 10^2 $ copy numbers per species, a total number of  $ (10^2)^3 = 10^6 $ coupled ordinary differential equations (ODEs) has to be solved.

This situation is comparable to the one in polyreaction kinetics: There, too, single molecules (monomers) are linked together to long chains whose dynamical mathematical description gives rise to huge numbers of ODEs, say up to  $ 10^4 - 10^6 $ in realistic examples, sometimes even not known in advance. Among the present authors, Deuflhard and Wulkow have a long standing expertise in modelling and efficient simulation of polymer kinetics [10, 33, 36, 34, 23, 11, 35], which have materialized in a number of comprehensive numerical solvers and user-friendly software tools, which certainly are among the best in the field [7, 35]; in fact, there were speed-up factors of about  $ 10^4 $. However, as a distinguishing feature, polymerization systems possess a natural coordinate, the polymer chain length. For this reason, the