Along with the contour lines, the h-p-grid is depicted; the numbers indicate the maximal order of the polynomial basis. As desired, the discrete Galerkin method refines either the subdivision of space or the polynomial order or both in regions where the solution changes significantly, and the grid shows a nearly perfect symmetry. The number of degrees of freedom of this h-p-grid is about 1600. A three-dimensional mesh plot of the solution is given in Figure 4. It reveals that the two modes are linked by a “tunnel” or transition path which allows for switching between the two states.

Figure 5 shows the time-evolution of the degrees of freedom for the tolerances 0.1, 0.03, 0.01. It can be nicely seen how the adaptive strategies refine the approximation according to the requirements of the changing distribution. It can also be recognized that the number of variables increases more or less linearly with the required tolerance - a sign for nearly exponential convergence rate of the discrete h-p-method. It should be pointed out that even when the desired accuracy is rather high, only about 3000 degrees of freedom have to be handled, whereas a naïve computation of the PDF would require the solution of  $ 350^2 = 122500 $ ODEs. This corresponds to a reduction of more than 97.5%.

Next, in order to study an asymmetric and more challenging situation, we chose  $ \mu_1 = 100 $,  $ \mu_2 $,  $ \sigma_1 = 10 $, and  $ \sigma_2 = 3 $ in (3.29). The initial domain has been chosen to  $ [0, 150] \times [0, 20] $. In the course of the integration this range is extended adaptively. The panels of Figure 6 show the time evolution of the PDF. First, the main part of the probability mass is attracted by the lower steady state since it is closer to the center of the initial PDF than the upper one. At  $ t = 16000 $ the distribution is stretched a bit, and the additional grid refinements around (50, 200) seem to be dispensable. However, the coloured contour plot (here plotted in logarithmic greyscale) indicates that some of the probability mass already leaks to the other stationary state. As time evolves, more and more probability mass fluctuates very slowly from the lower to the upper steady state until finally an equilibrium between both states is reached in the stationary distribution. This simulation has been performed with tolerance 0.01 and a maximum of 2700 variables at intermediate states. The h-p-grid is nearly symmetric at the final stage. This example shows how the h-p-algorithm and the ROM automatically capture the dynamics and the structure of distributions. More pictures would lead too far off here, but, e.g., by setting  $ \mu = 10^{-4} $ or even  $ \mu = 10^{-5} $, intermediate distributions with maximal particle numbers up to several thousands occurred and could equally well be represented.