where  $ \Gamma_r \in \mathbf{R}^{r \times r} $ denotes the “mass” matrix,  $ A \in \mathbf{R}^{r \times r} $ is a “stiffness” matrix representing the Galerkin discretization of the generator  $ \mathcal{A} $, the vectors  $ \eta_i $,  $ i = 0, 1, \in \mathbf{R}^r $ contain the Galerkin coefficients, and  $ \Delta \eta_0 = \eta_1 - \eta_0 $ is the corresponding difference. Note that the given initial values  $ \eta_0 $ correspond to some  $ p_r(t) \in \mathcal{H}_r $. However, there is no guarantee that  $ \eta_1 $ can also be associated with some  $ p_r(t + \tau) \in \mathcal{H}_r $. If necessary, the stepsize  $ \tau $ must be reduced until this condition can be satisfied.

By construction, the subspace  $ \mathcal{H}_r $ has to be kept unchanged over the integration step in this approach. A change of the subspace after an integration step is possible, but a rather subtle task requiring a careful control of interpolation errors. Moreover, earlier computations in polyreaction kinetics have confirmed the undesirable experience that, already after one integration step, the approximation tends to “leave” the preassigned subspace  $ \mathcal{H}_r $ with the consequence of either extremely small timesteps or oscillatory numerical artifacts. For this reason, a “moving weight function” concept has been introduced in [10] which results in adaptive time dependent basis functions  $ \{q_k(t)\} $. A comparable approach has also recently been introduced by Engblom [13] in his special case without knowing about the earlier more general results in [10]. However, on the basis of numerical experience and theoretical investigations in [33], the MOL approach as a whole has turned out to be not sufficiently robust for complex polyreaction kinetics. For the same reason, we abandon this approach in the present context.

Rothe method (ROM): first time, then space. This approach has been introduced and theoretically backed for parabolic PDEs by Bornemann in his thesis [4, 2] and immediately transferred to polyreaction kinetics by Wulkow in his thesis [33, 34]. After discretization in time first, we are left with a sequence of continuous boundary value problems.

For linear problems, as the discrete PDEs of interest here, Bornemann [3] had even designed a special time integration scheme, which we recall for the convenience of the reader. We start from the abstract Cauchy problem (1.3) in terms of the generator  $ \mathcal{A} $ and given values  $ u_0 = p_r(t) \in \mathcal{H}_r $ for some Hilbert space  $ \mathcal{H}_r $ associated with the previous time point  $ t $. Let  $ u_i $,  $ i = 1, 2 $, denote approximations  $ p_r' \in \mathcal{H}_r' $ for some Hilbert space  $ \mathcal{H}_r' $ associated with the new time point  $ t + \tau $. A distinguishing feature between MOL and ROM is that, in the ROM, the Galerkin subspace  $ \mathcal{H}_r' $ can be adapted to the PDF solution  $ p(t + \tau) $, with  $ r' \neq r $ in general. In [3], several implicit time discretizations have been described in terms of some discrete time evolution  $ R(\tau \mathcal{A}) $ (for this notation compare, e.g., the textbook [8]). There is a more