## 1 Introduction

The mathematical modeling of macromolecular reactions leads to countable (possibly infinite) systems of ordinary differential equations (CODE's), describing e.g. the chain length distribution (CLD) of a polymer. The discrete Galerkin method for the numerical treatment of such problems has been suggested first by DEUFLMARD/WULKOW [5]. Since then this approach has been developed to a standard, which now allows the implementation in program packages. The discrete Galerkin method approximates the solution of a CODE by an error-controlled expansion into orthogonal polynomials of a discrete variable, which are generated by a weight function.

In the present summary two versions of the discrete Galerkin method are presented, which imply two different numerical concepts. In Section 2, the method is used in the context of a method of lines with moving basis functions as suggested in [5]. The problem is discretized first by an expansion into orthogonal polynomials, the resulting differential equations for the expansion coefficients are then numerically integrated in time. This approach has been successfully applied to practical examples [3], [7] and is implemented now in the package MACRON by ACKERMANN/WULKOW [1]. MACRON supplies the possibility of a fast numerical treatment of certain classes of realistic problems from polymer chemistry, soot formation and other fields.

A reversed order of approximation is applied in Section 3. The complete countable system is discretized in time first (outer time discretization), the arising stationary subproblems are solved by an extended Galerkin method using a two-parameter family of weight functions. The resulting research code CODEX by WULKOW [6] has, compared to MACRON, conceptual advantages concerning flexibility and reliability, but is not yet implemented for wide use.

Details of the presentation can be found in the literature referred to at the end of this paper.