<div style="text-align: center;">Tab. 1. Some important reaction steps in polymer systems</div>



<table border=1 style='margin: auto; word-wrap: break-word;'><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'></td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>Reaction</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>Closed moments</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>Characteristics</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>Propagation</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ P_{s} + M \xrightarrow{k} P_{s+1} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>yes</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>leads to Poisson distribution, local structure</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>Termination</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ P_{s} + P_{r} \xrightarrow{k(s,r)} D_{s+r}/D_{s} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>yes/no depending on the structure of  $ k(s, r) $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>costly, global structure</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>Transition</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ P_{s} + A \xrightarrow{k(s)} Q_{s} + B $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>yes/no depending on the structure of  $ k(s) $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>general step, local structure</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>Statistical degradation</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ P_{s} \xrightarrow{k(s,r)} P_{r} + P_{s-r} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>no</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>may lead to high polydispersity, global structure</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>Reversible polymerization</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ P_{s} \xrightarrow{k} P_{s-1} + M $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>no</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>local structure</td></tr><tr><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>Transfer to polymer, long chain branching</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>$ P_{s} + D_{r} \xrightarrow{k \cdot r} D_{s} + P_{r} $</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>no</td><td style='text-align: center; word-wrap: break-word;'>may lead to very high polydispersity, global structure</td></tr></table>

be interpolated. Because of the small computational effort of the quadrature, a rough knowledge of the maximum chain length and of the form of the distributions is sometimes sufficient. The disadvantage of model reductions is that a lot of insight into the process is required. QSSA only works for a very restricted class of problems — often related to radical polymerization. For the study of a new model a premature reduction of the modeling ideas is not desirable, of course.

## Lumping, continuous modeling

In a lumping process, certain components of the scheme are lumped together to a superspecies, which is also described by a differential equation. The lumping scheme must fit to the reaction scheme and its solution and requires a lot of insight into the process to be treated. A (difficult) change of the lumping mechanism during the time integration can be necessary. Besides, in most cases there is no error control of the chosen lumping. In refs. $ ^{2,14} $ lumping procedures are performed for a complicated degradation process reflecting how difficult and specialized lumping can be.

In a continuous modeling the discrete set of kinetic differential equations is expanded in a partial differential equation for large chain lengths, which is considered as a continuous variable. For such an expansion an unknown modeling error is introduced, which cannot be estimated — in particular for short polymer chains. Moreover, the resulting partial differential equation is often more complicated to solve than the original discrete problem and may include additional undesirable properties $ ^{6} $. Nevertheless, the continuous approach has been quite popular for a while. The reason is that techniques already developed for partial differential equations could be