The simulation of molecular weight distributions in polyreaction kinetics ...

 $$ \begin{aligned}&I+M\quad\xrightarrow{k_{s}}\quad P_{1}\\&P_{s}+M\quad\xrightarrow{k_{p}}\quad P_{s+1}\\&P_{s}+P_{r}\quad\xrightarrow{k_{t}}\quad D_{s+r}\\ \end{aligned} $$ 

describing a polymerization with initiation, propagation and recombination. The dimension of the related system of differential equations

 $$ \begin{aligned}\frac{\mathrm{d}I(t)}{\mathrm{d}t}&=-\boldsymbol{k}_{s}I(t)M(t)\\\frac{\mathrm{d}M(t)}{\mathrm{d}t}&=-\boldsymbol{k}_{s}I(t)M(t)-\boldsymbol{k}_{\mathrm{p}}M(t)\sum_{r}P_{r}(t)\\\frac{\mathrm{d}P_{1}(t)}{\mathrm{d}t}&=+\boldsymbol{k}_{s}I(t)M(t)-\boldsymbol{k}_{\mathrm{p}}M(t)P_{1}(t)-\boldsymbol{k}_{\mathrm{t}}M(t)P_{1}(t)\sum_{r}P_{r}(t)\\\frac{\mathrm{d}P_{s}(t)}{\mathrm{d}t}&=-\boldsymbol{k}_{\mathrm{p}}M(t)(P_{s}(t)-P_{s-1}(t))-\boldsymbol{k}_{\mathrm{t}}P_{s}(t)\sum_{r}P_{r}(t)\qquad s\geq2\\\frac{\mathrm{d}D_{s}(t)}{\mathrm{d}t}&=\frac{1}{2}k_{t}\sum_{r=1}^{s-1}P_{r}(t)P_{s-r}(t)\end{aligned} $$ 

depends on the reaction rate coefficients and the concentrations of the involved species and varies with time. The time-evolution of the chain-length distributions  $ (P_{\beta})_{s} $ and  $ (D_{\beta})_{s} $ and the concentrations of initiator I and monomer M have to be computed. The difficulty is that only for relative simple reaction schemes, as e. g. living polymerization (without chain termination) or certain radical polymerization processes (with an additional Bodenstein quasi-steady-state assumption), analytical solutions can be derived. On the other hand, a direct numerical integration of the above nonlinear and stiff system may take hours of computing time on a supercomputer for realistic dimensions. Interesting models additionally require the treatment of temperature and volume, the modeling of the operation mode of the reactor, the consideration of feed, mix and split strategies, grafting, branching and cross-linking. Some of these aspects can be incorporated in a model in terms of kinetic reaction steps, other require additional differential or algebraic equations or a posteriori analysis.

However, even the simple looking process (1) has complicated properties. The chain addition step propagates a given distribution to higher chain lengths whereas the maximum of the distribution decreases. Each elemental propagation reaction connects only the concentrations of molecules with neighbouring chain lengths. In the termination step all chains may interact (global behavior) leading to a smoothing of the whole distribution. The dynamic combination of various reaction steps can lead to very different forms of distributions for  $ P_s $ and  $ D_s $ dependent on the input concentrations and the reaction mode.

As a consequence of the above described difficulties, the numerical solution of equations as (2) requires some kind of approximation procedure including all distri-